# Why Mary?

The question of why we need Mary is often a very important question for those of the Protestant persuasion. I find a lot of sympathy with the position because I myself didn't really find much support on the issue and relied more on my faith that the Catholic Church is the true church of Christ. For some that will not be a satisfactory response and I totally understand as it is not intended to convince. I've researched the topic much more extensively below for the benefit of Protestant readers who might be interested in understanding the biblical and theological basis for such a doctrine that would undoubtably cause difficulty for Protestants.

I find myself sympathizing with Protestants once more by noticing the critique offered by the deceased Dr. Ben Arbour (Rest in Peace) who said that he found that obligation imposed by the Catholic Church to believe the Marian Dogmas to be unnecessary and divisive. I will link the paper below because I find it to be a very sincere objection to the declaration and definition of the dogmas. If the reader is not aware already, I would suggest refering to some trustworthy source on the definitions and usage of such terms in Catholic contexts. One example I am using is the term dogma which has a specific definition that may not be obvious to a non-Catholic. I hope that the defenses I pose below provide solid ground for dogmas which the church defends in caring for the People of God.

I find that one of my favorite aids on this matter is what St. John Henry Newman says about the Immaculate Conception in a short memorandum to a friend. He begins by noting that it is difficult to object to the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception is one properly understands it. St. John Henry Newman opens with the fact that no one finds the idea that Eve was born with original sin shocking. Would we be inclined to worship Eve if she never fell into original sin or would it be possible to worship the pre-fallen Eve? He follows that it is not a crazy leap to believe that Mary would've been preserved from the stain of original sin considering the sanctifying grace that St. John the Baptist received when Mary visited Elizabeth. Some may contest this claim of whether St. John the Baptist received santifying grace but we can understand this to be the case be he lept in his mother's womb upon being in front of the baby Jesus still in Mary's womb. We also see that Mary is filled with the Holy Spirit and greets Mary with the first part of the Hail Mary. The claim of the Immaculate Conception is quite modest if one considers that all it means is that God offered santifying grace at the moment of her conception which explains why she is "full of grace" and "blessed among women". Her blessed status among women is paralleled with the blessed fruit of her womb.

I'm sure that objections will follow about why St. Paul doesn't speak about these issues and I would recommend considering the purpose of St. Pauls writings. He is exhorting his listeners to adhere to the orthodoxy he has taught them in spoken word and letter. These letters are the paper trail that he leaves while on the run and it would be appropriate to assume that he is not trying to write a theological treatise or systematic list of doctrines in his letters. Rather, he is preaching and correcting the people that he meets so as to present the Gospel for the salvation of souls. St. Paul wouldn't find it necessary to rehash issues that are not contested such as the perpetual virginity of Mary, her Immaculate Conception, and so glorious Assumption into heaven. Also, Mary is still alive at the time of his writing of letters so the first two dogmas wouldn't be necessary to document and the bodily Assumption hasn't happened yet.

## Mariology

Mariology is a study that exceeds the study of just the Virgin Mary, but is intimately connected with areas of Christology, ecclesiology, pneumatology, supernatural anthropology, and eschatology [1]. Mary in vertical dimensions by her three-fold relation to the Trinity which she has with the three Divine Persons. She has a horizontal relation with the Church and then to humanity and finally to the universe [1]. The mediation of Mary can be seen through the three ministries of Christ as prophet, king, and priest. The mediation of Mary reflects her maternal priesthood. We can see Mary's queenship in the context of her Assumption. Finally, we see the prophetic role of Mary through her apparations such as that at Guadalupe or Fatima. Marian apparations are called the "field most neglected, unknown, and least researched, in a scholarly manner,in all of theology [Marian Apparitions: Their Meaning, Their Value, and Their Relevant Message]."

## Biblical Foundations

There are 3 main verses that are claimed as the backing for the prophetic role of Mary:
Gen 3:15 which speaks about the struggle between the forces of evil and humanity, namely exemplified by Mary and her Son Jesus, produced from her seed. The serpent, an enemy of man, tries to harm the people of God and attack the heel of the woman and is consequently crushed by the same heel. This is a prophecy contained within the allegorical and historical/semi-historical text of Genesis. He is not only referring to a general sense of humanity, but a specific person who is to be the Messiah. The new Adam cannot be separated from the New Eve. The "enmity" between the serpent and woman which is being spoken to the first parents just caught in sin and being "punished" and it prophesizes the enmity between Mary and Satan.

Isaiah 7:14 prophesizes the virginal birth of the Messiah and the Annunciation also contains reference to this prophecy.
